so add Snowden a lot of people in this
country are probably curious when was
the last time you had substantive
discussions about coming home to the
United States and would this still be
your preference do you still refer to it
as home the United States will always be
my home and I'll always be willing to
come back on a single condition and I've
been quite clear about this over the
years this is that the government
guarantee that I have the right and
every whistleblower has the right to
tell the jury why they did what they did
right we can disagree about whether this
was right or wrong we can disagree about
whether this is good or bad we can
disagree about whether this is legal
early illegal that's right and proper in
a democracy but we have to agree that
the jury is supposed to be the proper
authority to ultimately decide was this
right or wrong and I hate to say it but
under current laws that is explicitly
forbidden under the Espionage Act which
as you know it's increasingly being used
against the sources of journalism
instead of foreign spies the law makes
no distinction between someone who tells
a secret to a journalist and someone who
tells a secret to a foreign government
and and so yeah there have nots there
has not been any movement unfortunately
on that conversation since the Obama
administration when I told that the
government that all they need to do is
give me the right of what we call a
public interest offense this is a fair
trial an open trial where the jury hears
what is happening and they decide was
this justified or not and unfortunately
a then Attorney General Eric Holder
responded and said we can't promise that
we won't promise that we will promise
not to torture you unfortunately I'd say
that's not quite enough something you've
said repeatedly is that you would expect
and you would accept a certain
punishment for your actions what if that
package of punishment in
working for the home team what if
someone said help us harden our
elections from attack using your skills
I would volunteer for that instantly you
know they they wouldn't even have to pay
me for that remember I volunteered to
work for the CIA
for the NSA when I came forward to
reveal mass surveillance which we need
to be clear the courts have found was in
fact unlawful on the part of the
government and one court said likely
unconstitutional so I have no objection
to helping the government I came forward
not to burn the NSA down I came forward
to reform it to help it return to the
ideals that we're all supposed to share
so there will never be a question of
when my government is ready when my
government wants me to help I will be
there
how has your opinion changed about mr.
Putin since you've been in Russia well I
don't think it really has changed
because the question might presume that
I had a positive opinion at some point I
think everyone would agree probably
including the Russian President himself
that he is an authoritarian leader I
think the Russian government broadly
does not have a good record on human
rights and that hasn't changed how odd
is it to you that while you've been
there consensus here has hardened that
they are the actors who interfered in
our last presidential election I don't
think that's especially surprising there
was a story published in The New York
Times actually reporting on a study in
February of 2018 and was also done in
the Washington Post a few months prior
to that about the record of electoral
interference and they looked at the
history of Russia and the Soviet Union
and an electoral Intel interference by
intelligence agencies and they found I
think 36 different cases of electoral
interference over roughly the past 50
years
but then they also looked at the United
States intelligence services and found
that we hit enter feared in foreign
elections eighty-one different times now
this is not to say one is better than
the other it's not about that it's about
budget about capability but we do what
we do see from this is that what
happened in 2016 actually was not
unusual from the perspective of
intelligence agencies this is what they
believe are they are hired to do what we
have to do is find out how to secure our
systems against the attacks that we know
are inevitable something you've been
asked before something you have answered
before but since this is a fresh
occasion we'll will ask it again why not
stay in this country and face the music
if you believed in the strength of your
conviction this is a great question
Brian and I'm glad you asked it when we
say face the music the question is well
what song are they playing I was
intentionally charged as every major
whistleblower in the last decades has
been with the very particular crime this
is a violation of the Espionage Act of
1917 and and this is a law that is
explicitly designed to prohibit a
meaningful defense in court this is
applied or this law is used against
people who's the only thing that they've
done and this is by the government's own
terms the only thing the government
accuses people defending themselves
against this charge I have done is that
they have told something to a journalist
that the government considers classified
that is the whole of the crime they
don't consider whether it was good or
bad they don't consider whether or not
it caused harm simply did you tell
something classified to a journalist if
you did the jury is not allowed to
consider and in fact they're explicitly
forbidden from considering why you told
journalists they're explicitly forbidden
from considering did it result in a
public benefit right did it further the
public interest instead they simply say
did you tell a journalist let the glass
buy so I am NOT if I had stayed in the
United States and my good friend Daniel
Ellsberg by the way that has told me
that I was right not to stand and wait
for an inevitable arrest because the
laws and the way they're enforced today
is not the same as the 1970s when he
came forward with the Pentagon Papers I
would not have received a fair trial
there would not have been much of a
trial at all I would only have received
a sentencing and the question there is
what message does that send whether you
like me or not
I could be the best person in the world
I could be the worst what message does a
conviction where you spend the rest of
your life in prison for telling
journalists things that change the laws
of the United States that have resulted
in the most substantive reform so
intelligence authorities since the 1970s
if the only result of doing that is a
life sentence in prison the next person
who sees something criminal happening in
the United States government will be
discouraged from coming forward and I
can't be a part of that where do your
parents come down on what you did in the
book we learn a lot more than we knew
about them they were both we say this in
quotes deep Staters we learn that they
both had varying degrees of security
clearances in their lives yeah I come
from a federal family my father worked
for the military my mother works for the
courts my whole line going back has
worked in the in the government service
so I think this was difficult for them
and in fact one of the things that I
will be eternally grateful for is the
fact that they still stand by me today
and believe that I did the right thing
were they present for your wedding
you've gone and gotten married in the
years since we've last spoken there
hasn't been a wedding yet actually we
were married but it was just a paperwork
sighs in a courthouse because Lindsay
and I had been living together we had
been in love with each other we had been
in a relationship for more than ten
years there will be a wedding someday
Brian and I hope you'll be there
what do you make of Donald Trump there
are so many things that are said about
the president right now and so much
thinking and honestly I try not to think
about it there's so much chaos and there
are so many aggressive and offensive
things said I think even his supporters
would would grant that but I think he's
actually quite simple to understand
Donald Trump strikes me like nothing so
much as a man who has never really known
a love that he hasn't had to pay for and
so everything that he does is informed
by a kind of transactional ism I think
and what he is actually looking for is
simply for people to like him
unfortunately that produces a lot of
negative effects do you believe he is a
threat to national security I mean this
is the question of who defines national
security what is national security when
we used to talk about national security
we thought about public safety but now
national security really means the
security of the system itself the
institution of government and I think
he's made it his stated goal to change
the way that system works I think we
have seen tremendous harm done to civil
liberties in the United States
increasingly since September 11th and I
haven't seen any reduction in the rate
of that we have several important jobs
vacant in this country including
director of national security national
security advisor is that a threat to our
security
I think it really says something about
where we are what this point in our
history looks like when we find that
there are not enough people in the
country that are willing not to serve in
the White House and qualify to serve in
the White House who all sides of the
government feel comfortable working with
and who they can back we are in a time
that is increasingly fractured and I
think that's a product of the fact that
look if you look around at the world
right now when you look at news when you
look at news coverage when you look at
every controversy that we see something
has changed and that is that it has
become increasingly popular for your
feelings to matter more than the facts
and I think that's toxic to a democracy
because if there's one thing that we
have to have to be able to have this
discussion to be able to learn to live
with people that we disagree with we
can't have a conversation about what we
should do we can't have a conversation
about where we are going if we can't
agree on where we are if we can't agree
on what is happening facts have to
matter more than the feelings you've
said your greatest fear over what you
did was that things would not change
have things changed would you do it
again today knowing what you know now
this is a significant portion of the the
final chapter of my book things have
changed and I would do it again if I
changed anything I would hope that I
could have come forward sooner it took
me so long just to understand what was
happening and it took so long
not to realize that nobody else was
going to fix this believe me when I say
I did not want to light a match and burn
my life to the ground no one does nobody
really wants to be a whistleblower but
the results of that
have been staggering I thought this was
gonna be two days story I thought
everybody was gonna forget about this a
week after the journalist ran the first
stories in 2013 but here we are in 2019
and we're still talking about it in fact
data security surveillance the internet
manipulation and influence that's
provided or produced rather by a
corporate or governmental control of
this permanent record of all of our
private lives that's been created every
day by the devices that we have before
2013 if you said there's a system that's
watching everything you do the
government is collecting records of
every phone call in the United States
even for those people who are not
suspected of any crime it was a
conspiracy yes there were some people
who believed it was happening yes there
were academics who could say this was
technically possible yes there were
technologists who could went this is
something that could be done but what we
didn't have it was we the world of 2013
we suspected some suspected that this
was happening the world after 2013
we know that it's happening and this is
the critical importance of journalism
particularly in this moment that we have
today
the distance between speculation and
fact is everything in a democracy
because that's what what lets us as we
did post 2013 change our laws now the
very first program that was real to
newspapers I has since been terminated
Barack Obama who criticized me so
strongly in June of 2013 by January of
2014 was proposing that this program be
ended eventually it was ended under the
USA Freedom Act the NSA argued that mass
surveillance was legal bulk collection
as they they call it they said 15
different judges authorized this what
they didn't tell us was that those 15
judges all belonged to the rubber-stamp
FISA Court that over 33 years had been
asked 33 thousand nine hundred times by
the government to approve surveillance
requests
only said tow in 33 years 11 times now
this was a court that was never designed
to interpret the Constitution right it
was never designed to create novel
powers for the intelligence community
it was just designed to stamp basic
routine warrants now we know what has
changed the very first open court
outside of these secret rubber-stamp
courts that got this case in front of
them I was judge Leon in a federal court
and then a court of appeals and said
that the NSA's mass surveillance
activities were violating even the very
loose standards of the Patriot Act they
broke the law he further said these
programs are likely unconstitutional and
this would not have happened if we
couldn't say this is real this is
actually happening and I just want to
make clear that's not me saying that
that's not speculation that was the
determination of the Supreme Court just
a few months before I came forward in a
famous case Amnesty versus clapper I I
believe it was in February of 2013 or
door December of 2012 all the way to the
Supreme Court these surveillance
authorities were being challenged the
plaintiff said the government has a mass
surveillance program it has impacted
this human rights organization they have
been spied on in secret by the
government the government said that may
be but if it's happening we will neither
conform confirm nor deny that it's
happening it is a state secret and
because you can't prove it the court
should be forbidden from ruling on the
constitutionality of this program and
sadly the Supreme Court of the United
States agreed
they said this program could be
unconstitutional but if you cannot prove
it exists we cannot evaluate it that's
what 2013 changed on the legal side we
have now had the GDP or we have firt had
the first European regulation
that are trying to limit the amount of
data that can be collected secretly and
used against populations broadly and we
have also seen the basic structure of
the Internet itself change in response
to this understanding that the network
path that all of our communications
cross when you request a website when
you send a text message when you read an
email for so long those communications
have been electronically naked or
unencrypted before 2013 more than half
the world's internet communications were
unencrypted now far more than half are
measured by just web traffic from where
the world's leading browsers the Google
Chrome browser some figures showed it
more than 80 percent the entire world
has changed in the last few years it
hasn't gone far enough the problems
still exist and in some ways they've
gotten worse but we have made progress
that would not have been possible if we
didn't know what was going on related
question what today can the government
do to your phone and your laptop the
phone and laptop of any American what's
the extent of the government's reach if
they're determined to reach into your
life we could talk about this question
for hours Brian but we don't have time
so I'll try to summarize hacking has
increasingly become what governments
consider a legitimate investigative tool
they use the same methods and techniques
as criminal hackers and what this means
is they will try to remotely take over
your device once they do this by
detecting a vulnerability and in the
software that your device runs such as
Apple's iOS or Microsoft Windows they
can craft a special kind of attack code
called an exploit
they then launch this exploit at the
vulnerability on your device which
allows them to take total control of
that device anything you can do on that
device the attacker in this case the
government can do they can read your
email they can
collect every document they can look at
your contact book they can turn the
location services on they can see
anything that is on that phone instantly
and send it back home to the mothership
they can do the same with laptops the
other prong that we forget so frequently
is that in many cases they don't need to
hack our devices they can simply ask
Google for a copy of our email box
because Google saves a copy of that
everything that you've ever typed into
that search box Google has a copy of
every private message that you've sent
on Facebook every link that you've
clicked everything that you've liked
they keep a permanent record of and all
of these things available not just to
these companies but to our governments
as they are increasingly deputized as
sort of miniature arms of government
what about enabling your microphone
camera if you can do it they can do it
it is trivial to remotely turn on your
microphone or to activate your camera so
long as you have systems-level access if
you had hacked someone's device remotely
anything they can do you can do they can
look up your nose right they can record
what's in the room the screen may be off
as it's sitting on your desk but the
device is talking all of the time the
question we have to ask is who is it
talking to even if your phone is not act
right now you look at it it's just
sitting there on the charger it is
talking tens or hundreds or thousands of
times a minute
to any number of different companies who
have apps installed on your phone it
looks like it's off it looks like it's
just sitting there but it is constantly
chattering and unfortunately like
pollution we have not created the tools
that are necessary for ordinary people
to be able to see this activity and it
is the invisibility of it that makes it
so popular in common and attractive for
these companies because if you do not
realize they're collecting this data
from you this very private and personal
data there's no way you're going to
object to it what about its ability to
track its own
and talk to me specifically about the
case of Jamal khashoggi so in the case
of Jamal Khashoggi
this is a Washington Post reporter and a
primary critic of the Saudi regime he
was lured into the Saudi Arabian
consulate in Istanbul in Turkey and
while his fiance waited outside for him
to get the paperwork he needed in order
to marry her he was murdered by the
Saudi government allegedly on the orders
of the Crown Prince now we have to ask
ourselves how did the Saudi government
decide that he was worth killing how did
they decide when and how they would kill
him how did they know this opportunity
was going to arise how do they know what
his plans and intentions were that they
needed to stop from their perspective we
don't have evidence that his phone
personally was hacked unfortunately
because we do not have his phone but we
do have the phones of his friends who
were living in exile in Canada and we do
know thanks to the research of a group
called the citizen lab affiliated with a
university in Canada that their phones
were hacked which means their
conversations with Jamal khashoggi were
intercepted and this allowed the Saudi
regime to know that he was intending to
create an electronic protest movement
they didn't need to know from his
friend's phone or even from his phone
that he was travelling to the consulate
because he had to make an appointment
but it did tell them his private
intentions his hopes and dreams for a
different government for their country
and perhaps although we do not know for
sure on that basis they decided to
murder him once your phone is hacked
what is in their hands is not simply
your device it is your future
it's important also to remember how did
the government of Saudi Arabia manage to
hack these people's phones which are
modern phones well they didn't have this
capability in their government they
didn't have this level of intelligence
capability available to them directly so
they purchased it from a digital arms
broker a company called the NSO Group an
Israeli company in this company the only
thing they do is manufacture digital
weapons kind of hacking tools they can
be used against the critical
infrastructure that all of us rely on
the phones and our pockets they
primarily target devices such as the
Apple iPhone and they sell this
capability to break into phones of
people around the world for millions and
millions of dollars to some of the worst
governments on earth and the only
meaningful oversight that they have
unfortunately because the export control
laws for these kind of digital weapons
are extremely weak in Israel is their
own internal ethics board this is oh it
was fine
we didn't break any rules that has to
change what about the public attitude
held by millions of everyday Americans
all I've got on a computer is pictures
of my family CCTV cameras that are
prevalent in a ton of American cities
and overseas capitals those cameras are
your friend if you're innocent and have
nothing to hide well I'd say that's very
much what the average Chinese citizen
believed or perhaps even still to this
day believes but we see how these same
technologies are being applied to create
what they call the social credit system
if any of these family photos if any of
your activities online if your purchases
if your associations if your friends or
in any way different from what the
government or the powers-that-be of the
moment would like them to be you're no
longer able to purchase train tickets
you're no longer a
to board an airplane you may not be able
to get a passport you may not be
eligible for a job you might not be able
to work for the government all of these
things are increasingly being created
and programmed and decided by algorithms
and those algorithms are fueled by
precisely the innocent data that our
devices are creating all of the time
constantly invisibly quietly right now
our devices are casting all of these
records that we do not see being created
that in aggregate seemed very innocent
you were at Starbucks at this time you
went to the hospital afterwards you
spent a long time at the hospital after
you left the hospital you made a phone
call you made a phone call to your
mother you talked to her until the
middle of the night the hospital was an
oncology clinic even if you can't see
the content of these communications the
activity records what the government
calls metadata which they argue they do
not need a warrant to collect tells the
whole story and these activity records
are being created and shared and
collected and intercepted constantly by
companies and governments and ultimately
it means as they sell these as they
trade these as they make their
businesses on the backs of these records
what they are selling is not information
what they're selling is us they're
selling our future they're selling our
past they are selling our history our
identity and ultimately they are
stealing our power and making our
stories work for them what devices do
you use in your life now and have you
accepted the notion that you are watched
rather constantly well probably every
intelligence the world is definitely
targeting me in trouble
anything they can just as they did with
Jamal khashoggi in regards to what are
my plans and intentions I try not to
make that easy for them if I get a smart
phone and I need to use a phone I
actually open it up before I use it I
perform a kind of surgery on it to
physically desolder or sort of melt the
metal connections that hold the
microphone on the phone and I physically
take this off I remove the camera for
the phone and then I close it back up I
seal it up and then if I need to make a
phone call I will attach an external
microphone on and this is just so if the
phone is sitting there and I'm not
making a call it cannot hear me now this
is extreme most people do not need this
but for me it's about being able to
trust our technology my phone could
still be hacked my laptop could still be
hacked and just as I told you before the
same principles applied to me if it is
hacked they can do anything to the
device that I can do so my trust in
technology is limited but just because
that's how it is today doesn't mean
that's how it has to be and a large
majority of my work with the freedom of
the press foundation where I serve as
president of the board is dedicated to
trying to make technology more secure to
try to create programs and protocols by
which we can make the communications of
sources and journalists more
confidential because if we lose the
confidentiality between sources and
journalists we lose access to those
essential facts that let us understand
what's happening in the world and
unfortunately under this White House
just like under the prior White House we
see the sources of very important
stories that have advanced the public
interest facing retaliation from a very
angry government I believe it's in the
first half of the book and I'm
paraphrasing you come out and just say
the computer guy knows everything or at
least he should
what part computer guy are you were you
and what part trained spy
well for the vast majority of my career
I was what was called a systems engineer
or a systems administrator an
administrator sort of maintains and
expands a system that they have
inherited and a systems engineer sort of
develops new projects new capabilities
for these systems roles what this means
in short was that all of the systems the
NSA and the CIA that I was put in charge
of I had total access to and this is
just what happens with the systems
administrator when you think about a
computer system who gives someone else
access well someone has to be the
original authority that has access to
everything that was me and so I would
say the computer guy knows everything
that's not a boast that's simply the way
these systems are designed that's the
way they're structured and this is very
much a vulnerability because it means
that you have to trust this this
administrator will work to the good of
the users but what happens when the
people using that network the people
constructing that network are going
against the benefit of the broader
society and this put me in a very
interesting kind of conflicted position
I could do what the NSA wanted me to do
or I could do what the Constitution of
the United States the the public of the
United States needed me to do which was
report that my agency had broken the law
do you regard yourself as a journalist
these days I'm not I'm not I have
tremendous respect for journalists but I
try to keep a distance particularly in
this moment where so much of journalism
is coming under attack because the
government has a tremendous incentive to
discredit me to make people distrust me
and so if I hold myself out if I start
reporting stories if I start talking to
sources if I try to start advancing what
the public knows on a personal level my
reputation could could sort of poison
instead I keep a distinction what I do
is I try to aid the work of journalism
but I am NOT myself a journalist your
book is highly personal tell us about
the price your then girlfriend now wife
paid for your actions and how you feel
she was miss portrayed in the eyes of
the world when we got that first kind of
thumbnail sketch of who she was so in
the wake of the revelations of mass
surveillance in 2013 this was suddenly
the world's biggest story in every
country they were talking about the same
thing and unfortunately that meant that
everyone who was connected to me in some
way they were also talking about because
they were trying to say who I was where
I came from and this unfortunately meant
that Lindsey my lifelong partner was
intensely investigated both by the FBI
in the United States she didn't know
what I was doing I could not tell her
what I was doing because if I had they
would have said she was an accessory to
the crime they would have said she was
part of a criminal conspiracy so long as
she didn't immediately pick up the phone
and say help help someone's talking to a
journalist and so this meant that I
couldn't tell her she learned about what
was going to happen the same way
everybody else did about what is
happening the same way everybody else
did she saw me on TV which probably
makes me the worst boyfriend in the
history of the United States but she
stuck by me and we are reunited and
together today and I will never be able
to repay her for the faith that she's
shown me but the media had a tremendous
amount of salacious reporting when they
realized that she taught toll pole
fitness classes which are quite popular
for him in these days they called her a
stripper even though she's never been
one even though she's a poet even though
she's a photographer
they sexualized her they focused on her
body they focus on her image because
that's what got attention she's a much
more complex and deep figure than the
media ever gave her credit for she is
more brave then anyone can possibly
understand and she's more political and
intelligent than any of these reporters
at the time could appreciate her
politics in fact influenced mine and I'd
like to think I learned as much from her
or perhaps even more than she ever
learned from me you paint a portrait of
what some of us knew and that was that
you were a thoroughly American kid in
your upbringing you wake up every day in
Russia you go to sleep every night in
Russia are you actively seeking to get
out are you as has been reported looking
for asylum
elsewhere well this is not an actively
seeking this is not a new thing and this
is important history especially for
those people who don't like me for those
people who doubt me who have heard
terrible things about me it was never my
intention to end up in Russia I was
going to Latin America and my final
destination was hopefully going to be
Ecuador when the United States
government heard that I had left Hong
Kong where I met the journalists they
canceled my passport they gave press
conferences about it which meant I
wasn't allowed to board my ongoing
flight which was going to take me
that's a Latin America rather than
applying for Russian asylum rather than
saying I'll play ball with any Russian
intelligence service just please protect
me I said no I will not cooperate with
the Russian government or any government
instead what I did as I was trapped for
40 days in an airport I don't know a
year longest layover is but 40 days was
was a tough stint I applied for asylum
in 27 different countries around the
world
traditional US allies places like France
and Germany places like Norway that I
felt the US government
and the American public could be
comfortable that was fine for
whistleblower being and yet every time
one of these governments got close to
opening their doors the phone would ring
and they're in their Foreign Ministries
and on the other end of the line would
be a very senior American official it
was one of two people then Secretary of
State John Kerry or then Vice President
Joe Biden and they would say look we
don't care what the law is we don't care
if you can do this or not we understand
the protecting whistleblowers and
granting asylum as a matter of Human
Rights and you could do this if you want
to but if you protect this man if you
let this guy out of Russia there will be
consequences we're not gonna say what
they're what they're gonna be but there
will be a response I continue to this
day to say look if the United States
government if these countries are
willing to open the door that is not a
hostile act that is the act of the front
of a friend
if anything if the United States
government is so concerned about Russia
right shouldn't they be happy for me to
leave and yet we see they're trying so
hard to prevent me from leaving I would
ask you why is that
I'm guessing Joe Biden is not your
candidate for 2020 actually I don't take
a position on the 2020 race look it's a
difficult position being in the
executive branch it's a difficult
position being in power and you have to
make unpopular decisions I would like to
think having seen now in 2019 that all
of the allegations against me did not
come true national security was not
harmed as a result of these disclosures
but they did win the Pulitzer Prize for
public service journalism the laws were
changed as a result the courts said
these programs were unconstitutional we
live in a safer and more secure world
because the Internet is safer and more
secure as a result of understanding
these common vulnerabilities which not
just US intelligence agencies we're
exploiting but our adversaries were
exploiting one
close these holes we do not become more
vulnerable we become more secure in 2013
it's fair to say some of these officials
some of these candidates grow well the
intelligence services are saying this
guy's dangerous they're saying this is a
risk they're saying this shouldn't have
happened in 2019 we can see that no
evidence has ever been presented that
the public understanding mass
surveillance is real has caused any kind
of harm whatsoever no one has died no
terrorist attacks have succeeded because
we knew about this stuff these programs
work regardless of whether or not you
know about them but we have seen the
public benefits substantiated year after
year after year and so I'd like to think
these people would reevaluate their
position you know there are government
officials who would push back very
strong on your assertion that national
security was not harmed you do you chose
not to stop with your revelations at
what was being done to Americans and you
got into America and its allies and
perceived enemies when we're looking at
the reports that were published in 2013
it's important to understand I never
published a single story the number of
documents that I revealed is zero what I
did was I collected an archive of
material showing criminality or
unethical or unconstitutional behavior
on the part of the United States
government I provided this archive to
journalists who were required as a
condition of access to this material not
to publish any story because it's
interesting they could publish no story
simply because it's newsworthy they were
only allowed as so far as the agreement
went to publish stories that they were
willing to stand up and say we're in the
public interest to know and this is not
some crazy fly-by-night organization
these are newspapers like the Washington
Post like the New York Times like the
Guardian and in every case this process
was followed now as an extraordinary
check
on top of this in case I went too far in
case I collected a document that was too
hot or I misunderstood things or the
jernt the journalists misunderstood
things the journalists were further
required to go to the government in
advance of publication and they were
required to do this at my request and
warned the government this is the story
that we're gonna run this is what it's
about
this is what we're gonna say so the
government could argue against it to
create an adversarial check on what the
journalists and I were trying to do to
reconstruct the system of checks and
balances in the United States that hid
itself failed in the government you know
because that process was followed so
scrupulously that's why I am so
confident that no harm happened no harm
occurred now if there are those in the
government that say harm took place if
there are those in the government who
say people have died I ask you this why
haven't they proved it you know better
than anyone Brian that these government
officials are more than happy to pick up
a phone and make a leak to the New York
Times every day of the week I
if they had some evidence that somebody
was hurt if they had evidence that a
terrorist attack got through because of
this journalism it would be in the front
page of every newspaper in the world and
despite six years of history that's
never happened describe your life today
what is every day like how are you
supporting yourself and and as a simple
equation if the Russians have reached so
effectively into our lives and our
electoral systems they must be all over
your life so that was several different
questions but yeah I'm sure the Russian
government is trying to spy on me I'm
sure the United States government is
trying to spy on me everyone's trying to
spy on me
the thing is I don't cooperate with them
my allegiance is to my country my
allegiance is to my Constitution now in
my terms of my daily life it's actually
pretty ordinary Oh which is to say it's
not so interesting
I've always been something of an indoor
cat
right among nightclubs and partying my
life since I was a child has always been
mediated by a screen that's my choice so
not much actually changes in my
day-to-day whether I'm living in New
York or Berlin or Moscow in terms of my
work which a lot of people are curious
about this I think is a polite way of
people asking do you work for the
Russian government do you accept money
from the Russian government you know are
you living in Russian government housing
are you in a bunker are there guards and
of course the answer to all of these is
no no I'm not what I do for a living is
speak professionally and now I'm
actually an author I have a speaker's
bureau it's called the American program
Bureau and you can call them and you can
book a public event I speak at
universities I speak at corporate events
I speak at cybersecurity conferences to
talk to people about what is happening
on the internet what is the future of
surveillance and how can we protect
ourselves I'm very fortunate to have had
that opportunity and it's meant that
I've had a quite comfortable life and in
quite a difficult position the former
White House aide HR Haldeman left us
with an expression for the ages and when
he said you can't put the toothpaste
back in the tube for Americans who feel
that that this is just a behemoth that
they could there's no way they could
have any control over it for Americans
who long ago decided we're just going to
have to live with this surveillance how
could it possibly be receded or
rescinded or stopped we can stop a
program we can thwart an attack we can
make a device more secure but as you
imply the system is still better the
institutions and agencies and companies
that produced these attacks that are
creating new methods of spying every day
will still be there the fundamental
change
not just in the United States but around
the world that has to happen is we have
to stop thinking about the limitations
on how data is used as data protection
regulations right now when we talk about
what Google and Facebook are doing right
now when we talk about what the NSA is
doing right now when we talk about what
rival governments are doing what the
Russians are doing what the Chinese are
doing what the North Koreans and the
Iranians are doing we're constantly
thinking about all right this data has
been collected and these companies have
it how do we regulate their use
regulating the use is a mistake we
should do that but that's the wrong
focus it is the collection of data that
is a problem when you start trying to
regulate use you're going to the
collection has already happened the
collection was already legal one of the
fundamental flaws in u.s. privacy
legislation is the fact that we are one
of the only advanced democracies in the
world that does not have any basic
privacy law whatsoever we have the
Fourth Amendment of the Constitution
which is the reason that I came forward
but that restricts what the federal
government can do that restricts what
the state governments can do it doesn't
restrict what companies can do and as
you know as everybody knows these
companies are playing a bigger and
bigger part in the world today we have
to say all of these records that they're
creating about all of us all this
control that they're developing from
these surveillance programs whether
they're saying they're doing it for
targeting advertisements or whether
they're doing it for targeting killings
these records belong to the people that
they are about not to the companies and
this is a fundamental change that we
have never discussed in a meaningful way
broadly and publicly but we have to
because all of these governments have
said you know the the mass surveillance
system why do we have it why is it
useful they say because of terrorism
they say it's saving lives they save its
oppressive anting attacks but no less
than Barack Obama
and the response to the 2013 revelations
created two independent Commission's to
investigate exactly the answer to that
question were these programs effective
in stopping terrorist attacks did these
revelations cause harm to national
security it was called the privacy and
civil liberties oversight board and the
president's review group on intelligence
and communications technologies and
despite having an enormous budget
despite having complete access to
classified information despite the fact
that they interviewed the heads of the
FBI the NSA the CIA you know the full
alphabet soup they found in the
government's own words the kind of mass
surveillance that's represented by this
bulk collection program where the NSA
was secretly collecting the phone
records of every American and everybody
else around the world every day under an
authority provided by a secret court
order that nobody even knew existed that
program had never made their own words a
concrete difference in a single
counterterrorism investigation think
about that more than 10 years of
operation and secret never made a single
concrete difference these programs mass
surveillance is not about public safety
it is not about terrorism it is about
power
it is about economic espionage it is
about diplomatic manipulation and it is
about social influence it is about
understanding the actions of everyone in
the world as carefully as they can no
matter who they are no matter how
innocent their life final question has
to do with the Fourth Amendment we have
it today because mr. Adams and others
wanted to keep the British out of their
homes and their horse carriages what
would mr. Adams and the founders make of
the reach of the government in your view
into our lives given its humble
beginnings
I think if any of the founders of this
country looked around today they would
be shocked by the kind of rhetoric they
hear and they would be shocked by the
kind of activities of government they
see if you read the Bill of Rights
something that struck me when I was
writing about it and in this book was
that fully half of the first ten
amendments are explicitly making the
work of government harder they're making
life for law enforcement officials
harder and all of the founding fathers
thought that was a good idea because
they recognized the more efficient a
government is the more dangerous it is
we want a government always that is not
too efficient we want a government
always that is just efficient enough
because government holds extraordinary
power in our lives we want government
always to be using their powers in a way
that is only necessary and proportionate
to the threat presented by whoever it is
that they're investigating when the
government is getting by by the skin of
their teeth the people are free right
the government should be afraid of the
people people shouldn't be afraid of the
government one of the ironies about the
founding fathers for those who are
skeptical of me which is fair again I
don't want you to trust me and I want
you to doubt me I want you to question
me but I want you to look at the facts I
want you to look beyond how you feel in
the moment how we all feel in the moment
and see what these stories said in 2013
see that the courts of the United States
where I'm being charged as a criminal
said that the government itself was
engaged in criminal activity look at
these things and then remember the
people who founded this country were
called traitors the signing the writing
of the Declaration of Independence was
an outrageous act of treason it was
criminal but it was also right the
question whether or not I broke the law
is less difficult
and less interesting than whether you
think what I did was right or wrong what
is legal is not always the same as what
is more final prediction then we'll let
you go nightclubbing
and that is do you predict do you
predict you will at some point live out
your life and die in the United States I
think I will return when we look at the
kind of things that we're being said
about me in 2013 the kind of hostility I
face the kind of accusations I faced
from the most senior officials in
government and we look at the world
today yes there are many still who don't
like me but far far fewer because we
have seen that all the harms that they
alleged over the course of these years
never came to pass
they were never substantiated because
they don't exist but the benefits are
becoming more clear with each passing
year the question that I think people
have to answer whether you like me as
person or not right whether you agree
with how I did what I did whether you
agree with the work of the journalists
who decided what the public should know
in order to cast their votes today you
know the government broke the law today
you know the United States government
had broken that violated the
Constitution and the rights of people in
this country and around the world would
you rather not know thank you and
Snowden thank you very much good luck
with the book that's my pleasure Brian
thank you for having me
hey there I'm Chris Hayes from MSNBC
thanks for watching MSNBC on YouTube if
you want to keep up to date with the
videos we're putting out you can click
subscribe just below me or click over on
this list to see lots of other great
videos